================
Terms of service
================

Terms of Service for Access and Use of SESAM Software as a Service
(SaaS)

1. Introduction
===============

1.1. Purpose
------------

This document contains terms of service for Customers' access to and
use of SESAM Software as a Service (“Services”) provided by SESAM.IO AS
922 409 676 (“SESAM”). The services consist of both free- and paid
subscriptions and the term “Customer” is used regardless of whether a
Subscription Fee applies to a particular Customer's account. Some
sections of this document will only apply to Customers with an account
with a defined Subscription Fee. Upon ordering access to the Services,
and confirming acceptance of the terms of service in this document, a
legally binding agreement (“Agreement”) is entered into between SESAM
and the Customer. All Services, as they are available at any time,
through the portal https://portal.sesam.io, are subject to the terms of
this Agreement.

Upon entering into this Agreement and the registration of the Customer
in SESAM's systems, the Customer is given a right to use the Services on
the terms in this Agreement. Once access to the Services has been
granted, the Customer will receive an e-mail to its registered e-mail
address with the necessary access and login details.

The Services consist of various sub-services, and the right to use the
Services only comprise the individual sub-services which the Customer
has ordered, and received access to. Some of the Services are payable.
The Customer's account overview sets out active sub-services which the
Customer has ordered, including which Services are payable.

Some sub-services may be subject to additional terms and/or
restrictions. Such additional terms and/or restrictions are set out in
the terms of use for the sub-service together with the description of
the sub-service in question.

1.2. Description of the Services
--------------------------------

The Services are standardized services, and the Customer acknowledges
that the functionality in the Services will change. The Customer is
given the right to use the Services, with the functionality as provided
from time to time. The right to use the Services is not connected to any
specific version of the underlying software or any set functionality as
provided at any time, but is rather connected to access to and use of
the Services as they are at any given time. Details of the functionality
of each of the Services can be found at https://docs.sesam.io.

2. The Right to use the Services
================================

2.1. General
------------

The Customer may set up Users and give these Users access to the
Services with different roles (each individual referred to herein as a
“User” and collectively as the “Users”). Users consist of natural
persons in the employment or service of the Customer.

The Customer and the Customer's Users receive a worldwide, limited,
terminable, non-exclusive and non-transferable right to use the Services
in accordance with the terms of this Agreement, exclusively for the
Customer's internal business purposes. This right is conditional on the
payment of the applicable subscription fee and other fees (“Subscription
Fee”). Any applicable Subscription Fee is provided on the Customer's
account overview.

The Payment of the Subscription Fee and the compliance with the terms of
this Agreement is a precondition for the right to use the Services.

SESAM may adjust the agreed Subscription Fee yearly, upon 3 months'
written notice. In case of changes in public taxes, charges or other
duties or other changes in public administrative practice affects the
vendor's costs connected to the Service, the Subscription Fee may be
adjusted correspondingly without prior notice.

The Customer may not allow a third party to use the Services in a
service bureau or similar, or offer services dependent on the Services
to a third party. However, the Customer may allow in- hire consultants
or temporary employees to use the Services for Customers internal
business purposes. The Customer may also use the Services to
collect/deliver data from the applications and databases of the
Customer's suppliers and/or customers.

The Services depend on standard software. When purchasing access to the
Services, the Customer does not purchase a copy of, or license to, the
software used to deliver the Services, but consecutively pay for a
subscription to access the Services. To the extent that separate
license- or other terms apply for use of third party software and/or
services included in the Services, these are set out together with the
description of the Services in question. Any terms for third party
software and/or services take precedence over the terms of this
Agreement.

2.2. The relationship between the Customer's Users and SESAM
------------------------------------------------------------

The Customer commits to adhere to the terms of this Agreement, and to
ensure that any of its Users do the same. The Customer accepts the full
responsibility for all activities connected to its Users, and its User's
compliance with the terms of the Agreement. When the individual User
accepts any terms upon logging into a Service, or on a later change of
such terms, no Agreement is made between such individual User and SESAM.
It is at all times the Customer who is party to any agreement with
SESAM, and who has all rights and obligations set out in such agreement.

The Customer accepts that SESAM may contact the Customer, and any
Customer administrators, through registered e-mail addresses and through
telephone, and provide general marketing information or other
information about the Services. Such information will not be sent to the
Customer's other Users.

2.3. User administration
------------------------

If the Customer is a physical person, the Customer will be assigned a
single User.

If the Customer is a legal person, Users are created and administrated
by the Customer. Customer's administrators for this Agreement should be
communicated to SESAM.

The logon information of an individual User shall not be shared or used
by more than one physical person, but may freely be reassigned by the
Customer's administrator. The Customer's administrator may also name
further administrators and delete Users. The Customer shall ensure that
all information about Users and administrators are up to date at all
times.

Each User is responsible for keeping his/her username and password
confidential. The Customer shall inform SESAM immediately in case of
unauthorized use of a User's logon information. Users are authorized to
provide SESAM's support personnel with access to their accounts where
such access is necessary to provide support or else asked for by the
User.

2.4. Requirements for use of the Services
-----------------------------------------

The Customer and any of its Users shall not transfer viruses, malware or
any other harmful code to the Services or use the Services in a manner
which gives a risk for such transfer. The Services shall not be used for
any illegal or otherwise unauthorized purpose. When the Services are
used outside of Norway, in cases where the Customer's Users temporarily
are staying abroad, the Customer is responsible for complying with the
Norwegian, EU and United States of America export restrictions and
-regulations, including assuring that the Services are not used in
jurisdictions where such use would be contrary to such export
restrictions and -regulations.

3. Technical information
========================

The Services will be delivered through the operating environment
selected by SESAM at any time, unless it is agreed with the Customer
that the Customer will use another operating environment. The Customer
will be given minimum three months' notice in case of significant
changes to the operating environment. SESAM reserves the right to change
the operating environment, but will in such event notify the Customer of
the change and of technical and legal effects of such change.

At the present time the operating environment selected by SESAM is
Microsoft Azure. For Azure, separate terms of service apply from
Microsoft:
`Online Subscription Agreement <https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/support/legal/subscription-agreement/?country=no&language=en>`_ and `Online Services Terms <http://www.microsoftvolumelicensing.com/DocumentSearch.aspx?Mode=3&DocumentTypeId=46>`_.
These terms apply as amended and updated by Microsoft at any time. SESAM
has no responsibility for error and defects in such services.

SESAM and the Customer may agree on special requirements for the
operating environment in a separate agreement.

To the extent technical requirements apply to the Customer's IT systems
for the use of the various Services, e.g. requirements for bandwidth
and/or hardware, this shall be set out together with the description of
the Services in question.

4. Sesam's Responsibility for Quality of Service, Availability and Support
==========================================================================

4.1. Quality of Service
-----------------------

SESAM warrants that the Services will perform substantially as described
in applicable Documentation of Services. The Services will be subject to
continual improvement.

If the Services do not function as described in applicable Documentation
of Services, SESAM will correct verified errors in the Services at
SESAMS's own expense. SESAM may choose to replace the Services or
functionality therein instead of performing a correction. If SESAM does
not solve the verified errors according to the time-limits set out
together with the description of the Services in question or does not
replace the Service within a reasonable time, the Customer may cancel
their subscription to that particular service in accordance with the
terms in section 11. The Customer may not set forth any other claims due
to defects or errors in the Services.

Links to websites not owned or controlled by SESAM that are available in
the Services, related web pages or the documentation are provided
without any responsibility or liability for SESAM. SESAM is not
responsible for the content and/or information on such websites. In the
same manner, SESAM is not responsible for defects and errors arising
from the Customer's own applications, databases or other systems.

4.2. Service Level Agreements (SLA) targets, penalties
------------------------------------------------------

The provisions in this section apply only to the Customers who pay a
Subscription Fee.

SESAM's Service availability targets, SLA penalties, and fixed
maintenance periods are set out together with the description of the
Services in question.

SESAM may, from time to time, require additional maintenance periods
beyond what is set out above, for example for major upgrades. Such
maintenance periods will be notified to the Customer at least 48 hours
in advance, and any unavailability does not count towards the
calculation of Service availability targets.

4.3. Notification of errors
---------------------------

If the Customer experiences that the Services in whole or in part are
unavailable, or have reduced performance, the Customer shall report the
error via https://support.sesam.io. In order to ensure that SESAM gets
necessary information to identify and correct the error, the Customer
shall, together with the notification of error, provide accurate
information about the error, including a description of how the error
occurred, how many Users are affected, and which dataflows and/or
systems are affected, or assist SESAM with gathering such information.

4.4. Support
------------

The provisions in this section apply only to the Customers who pay a
Subscription Fee.

SESAM will provide basic technical support to the Customer. This entails
technical assistance, but SESAM does not warrant that any solution will
be found for any problems or requests. The administration and
configuration of the Services for the Customer is not included in the
support, and may be provided according to separate agreements. This may
include assistance connected to integrated applications/databases.

The Customer may contact SESAM support on business days (Monday to
Friday except Christmas Eve, New Year's Eve and other Norwegian public
holidays) between 08:00 and 16: hours Central European Time, or on
specified times determined by SESAM. Any contact with SESAM support
shall take place via https://support.sesam.io.

Support is provided in accordance with the following guidelines:

- A Customer with more than three Users shall designate a contact person
  for support, which will act as the Customer's point of contact with
  SESAM. Accordingly, the contact person shall provide first line support,
  and forward detailed information to SESAM's personnel.
- Support requests shall regard the Services, when used in a manner
  recommended by SESAM. Support shall not cover repair of information,
  data-correction in a database or problems caused by the Customer.
  Neither shall the support cover any matter outside of the Services as
  covered by the Customer's subscription.
- SESAM will recommend training or consulting services if the support
  request takes the form of being general training or education.
- Support does not include any form of consulting services.

5. Security
===========

5.1. Rights to data
-------------------

The Customer retains all rights to all data that is entrusted to SESAM
for processing and which is stored or processed with help of the
Services under this Agreement.

Upon termination of all Services or individual Services, SESAM may
assist in transferring the data to a designated and usable format. Such
a service should be ordered at least 30 days before the end of the
subscription in question in order to ensure that the Customer can
receive the data before deletion. Such assistance is invoiced by SESAM
according to the at any time applicable fee schedule and terms for
consultancy services. On termination of the subscription of the Service
subscription, or subscription for an individual service, all Customer
data will be deleted by SESAM.

5.2. Security
-------------

Customer's privacy is important to SESAM and SESAM will abide by SESAM's
privacy policy. SESAM reserves the right to modify their privacy policy
from time to time.

SESAM provides secure and reliable services, and will at any time have
in place administrative, physical and technical security measures
including backup solutions according to corresponding standards:

- SESAM has established an information security governance system where
  systems, routines and processes which was set up in accordance with
  ISO 27001 and 27018.
- A yearly third party audit shall be carried out in accordance with
  ISO 27001.
- A confidential summary report of the audit shall be produced, and
  made available to the Customer upon request.
- The summary report shall enable the Customer to assess whether the
  security level in SESAM's services are according to the Agreement and
  the Customer's requirements.

5.3 Processing of personal data
-------------------------------

The Services may entail processing of the Customer's personal data,
e.g. storage in SESAM's operating environments, cf. section 3 above,
unless otherwise is agreed with the Customer.

If the Services entail processing of the Customer's personal data, the
Data Processing Addendum comes into force. The Data Processing Addendum
forms part of the Terms Of Service. The Data Processing Addendum are
hereby incorporated by reference and shall apply to the extent Customer
Data includes Personal Data, as defined in the DPA. The DPA further
states the Parties' obligations and rights as Controller and Processor,
regarding the Processor's processing of Personal Data on behalf of the
Controller. SESAM as the Processor, shall only process data in
accordance with the Data Processing Addendum.

In the circumstance that the Services entail processing of the
Customer's personal data the following will enter into force in addition
to the Data Processing Addendum:

The Customer is the Controller in accordance with EU's General Data
Protection Regulation (“GDPR”) article 4 paragraph 7. SESAM is the
Processor in accordance with GDPR article 4 paragraph 8.

The Customer as the Controller agrees and warrants that: - The Customer
owns or otherwise has the right to transfer the personal data to the
Service for processing, and that the Customer is responsible for the
accuracy, integrity, contents, and legality of the personal data,
including transfer and instructions; - Where applicable, that the
processing of personal data is covered by an applicable permit, and/or
has been notified to the applicable regulatory authorities and/or Data
Subjects, and that the processing of personal data is not in violation
of applicable law, hereunder GDPR. - It is the Customer's obligation as
the Controller to notify the applicable regulatory authorities and/or
Data Subjects in case of breach or unauthorized processing of personal
data, incl. special categories. - The Customer, by way of its risk
assessment, has verified that SESAM's security measures are effective
and appropriate for the processing in question; - SESAM has provided
sufficient guarantees in terms of logical, technical, physical and
organizational security measures. - SESAM generally recommends that the
Customer uses standard-level SLA or higher when processing personal
data. - If it is set forth in the agreement that the processing of
personal data includes processing of special categories of personal data
or data processing that entails high risk, SESAM requires that the
Customer uses standard-level SLA or higher.

6. Fees and Payment Terms
=========================

For Services included in this Agreement, the Customer may have payed a
Subscription Fee to SESAM as set out together with the description of
the Services in question.

Dynamic price model:

The price model is a dynamic (running) price model that is renewed
automatically until terminated by one of the parties as set out in
section 11.

Fixed price model:

A fixed price model entails that Sesam gives a 50% discount of a set
amount of data (GB), based on the dynamic price and provided that the
Customer in the Agreement agrees to the fixed price model for a
renewable term of 12 months.

If the Parties agrees upon fixed price, the Agreement will be for a term
of 12 months calculated from the date it is agreed between the parties
that the model is fixed price (most often the Date the Agreement is
signed by both parties). If the Customer uses more data than the agreed
upon fixed price model allows for that term, the fee for the data amount
(GB) surpassing the agreed upon fixed price, will be double of what
follows from the dynamic price model.

The Agreement will automatically be renewed with the same data amount
(GB) for the following 12 months as that of the running term, unless the
Customer gives at least one (1) month written notice prior to the
expiration of the running term that they do not want to continue with
the fixed price model at all, or if they want to make adjust to a higher
or lower fixed price model for the following 12 months term. Renewals
each 12 months will continue as long as the Agreement is running.

The Parties can additionally agree upon a support level of 24/7 provided
that the Customer has agreed to a fixed price model of 50 GB/month or
higher.

7. Right to Audit and Control
=============================

The provisions in this section apply only to the Customers who pay a
Subscription Fee.

SESAM shall, to the extent required by applicable audit standards or
applicable governmental requirements/legislation, allow the Customer's
internal or external auditors to observe SESAM's delivery of the
Services with related Customer data and any documentation for the
Services for the Customer. The Customer shall give reasonable notice
before such audits, at least 20 calendar days, and the audit shall be
carried out during normal business hours. The Customer acknowledges that
scope of audit shall be limited to SESAM's own delivery of Service, as
well as applicable documentation.

The Customers may not utilize auditors who are in direct competition
with SESAM. The auditor(s) shall sign a confidentiality statement. The
Customer shall adhere to SESAM's applicable regulations when access is
given to SESAM's facilities.

Any costs which SESAM may have in relation to the audit, control and any
possible further quality assurance that the Customer may require, will
be invoiced to the Customer in accordance with SESAM's applicable rates.

8. Changes to the Agreement
===========================

SESAM reserves the right to change the terms of this Agreement upon at
least 30 days' notice.

Reference is made to SESAM's limited opportunity to change the terms in
sections 5.2 and 5. regarding the processing of data. SESAM may not
change section 5.1. to the detriment of the Customer.

9. Infringement of Third Party Rights
=====================================

The provisions in this section apply only to the Customers who pay a
Subscription Fee.

SESAM shall defend the Customer against claims or law suits set forth by
third parties claiming that the Customer's use of the Services infringes
that third party's registered Norwegian or EU intellectual property
rights, including, without limitations, patents, copyright, trade
secrets, trademark or any other intellectual property rights. In the
event of such claims the Customer shall immediately inform SESAM in
writing.

SESAM shall, to the extent SESAM is responsible for the infringement,
hold the Customer harmless against all costs, damages, expenses or
losses that the Customer is ordered to pay by a court or agrees to pay
in a settlement, including attorney fees. This is subject to the full
co- operation of the Customer with SESAM and that SESAM is in full
control of the legal process and negotiations for a settlement. SESAM
may at its own discretion (i) modify the Services so that there is no
longer any infringement of third party rights, (ii) replace the Services
with functionally equivalent services, (iii) provide a right for the
Customer's continued use of the Services. If these options are not
available, SESAM may terminate the Customer's access to the Products and
Services with a refund of any fees paid for the subscription after the
date of termination. The Customer may not set forth any other claims as
a result of infringement of third party rights.

The previous right to be held harmless does not apply if the Services
have been used in violation of these terms and conditions or if the
claim arises out of any modification, integration or customization of
the Services not performed by SESAM.

The Customer shall defend SESAM against any claims or lawsuits in which
a third-party claim that the Customer's data or use of the Services in
combination with the Customer's own applications, databases or other
systems, is inconsistent with or infringes a third party's intellectual
property rights, including without limitations, patents, copyright,
trade secrets, trademark or any other intellectual property rights.
SESAM shall immediately notify the Customer in writing in the event of
such claims.

The Customer shall hold SESAM harmless against all costs, damages,
expenses or losses that SESAM is sentenced to pay by a court or
agrees to in a settlement, including attorney fees, provided that SESAM
cooperates with the Customer at the Customers own expense and that SESAM
provides the Customer with full control over the legal process and
settlement, and that the settlement releases SESAM from all liability.

10. Liability, Limitation of Liability etc.
===========================================

10.1. Limitation of liability
-----------------------------

If SESAM is held responsible for paying damages to the Customer as a
consequence of breaches of any of the obligations under this Agreement,
such damages will under no condition include compensation for indirect
loss or damages of any kind that may arise as a result of, or in
connection with, such breach. Indirect loss includes, but is not limited
to, loss of profit of any kind, losses as a consequence of disrupted
operations, loss of data, lost savings, losses due to deprivation and
claims from third parties (except as set out in section 9 above).
SESAM'S liability under this Agreement is therefore limited to direct
loss, unless otherwise set out in mandatory applicable law, for example
damages due to gross negligence or intent. Any refunds or compensation
for direct loss and costs during any 12-month period shall not exceed an
amount equivalent to 6 month's Subscription Fee's ex. VAT for the
Services during the same period.

If standardized sanctions are agreed, these standardized sanctions shall
be the sole remedy and no other claims may be made based on the same
situation.

10.2. Force majeure
-------------------

If the use and execution of the Services is wholly or partly prevented
or materially impeded by circumstances beyond the parties' control, both
parties' obligations are suspended for as long as the circumstances are
relevant and as long as these circumstances lasts. Such circumstances
include, but are not limited to, strikes, lockouts, and any relationship
which under Norwegian law will be regarded as force majeure. Each party
may, however, in accordance with section 11 of this Agreement, terminate
the Agreement if the force majeure makes it particularly burdensome for
that party to continue the Agreement.

In the event that law, rules or regulations applicable to the use or
delivery of the Services is changed or new rules or regulations are
adopted after the Services have been made available on the market and
this prevents SESAM from fulfilling the Customer's instructions pursuant
to the Data Processing Addendum or other obligations in this Agreement
and/or this requires full or partial termination of access to the
Services for a limited or indefinite period of time, this shall be
considered as a force majeure circumstance. SESAM is not in any way
responsible for any such or other force majeure circumstance.

10.3. Circumstances for which SESAM not in any event is responsible
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Even though SESAM will use appropriate care to ensure secure
transmission of information between the Customer and the Services, the
Customer recognizes that the Internet is an open system, and that SESAM
cannot warrant that a third party cannot or will not intercept or alter
data during the transmission. SESAM takes no responsibility for such
unauthorized access to, use or publication or loss of data.

Neither is SESAM responsible for lack of availability of the Services
when this is directly or indirectly caused by the Customer or by
circumstances for which the Customer is responsible or the
reconstruction of data regardless of cause.

11. Cancellation and Suspension
===============================

The Customer may cancel the Services or individual sub-services and
thereby cancel the entire subscription for SESAM's Service using the
Customer's account tool with applicable notice period. The cancellation
takes effect from the start of the first month after the end of the
notice period.

For non-paying Customers SESAM has the right to suspend or terminate
access to all or any part of the Service at any time, with or without
cause, with 14 days' prior notice. In case of abuse, access to Services
may be suspended or terminated without notice, effective immediately.

The provisions for the reminding of this section apply only to the
Customers who pay a Subscription Fee.

If a minimum term applies for some of the Services, the termination by
the Customer takes effect after the expiration of such minimum term.

If payment is not made within 30 days after the due date, SESAM may,
provided that the amount outstanding is not insignificant, suspend the
Customer's access to the Services until payment is made. Suspension
shall be notified in writing by SESAM, with a final and reasonable
deadline for the Customer to settle the amount outstanding before
suspension is made effective. SESAM may terminate the Customer's
accounts for the Services if payment is not made to SESAM within 14 days
after such suspension is made effective. The Customer shall pay delayed
interest in accordance with applicable law for all Subscription Fees
that are not settled before their due date. SESAM may make renewal of
the Customer's subscription conditional on a shorter payment due date or
increased invoice frequency after one case of delayed payment.

SESAM may terminate the Customer's subscription with 7 days' written
notice if the Customer is in breach of any of his obligations under this
Agreement, or if it becomes apparent that the Customer will materially
breach this Agreement in the future. SESAM may with 6 days' written
notice to the Customer also suspend the Customer's subscription to the
Services if the Agreement is breached by the Customer. Such suspension
may be in effect until the matter has been resolved.

SESAM reserves the right to terminate any service in its entirety, or
its availability in any market, with 6 months' notice before such
termination takes effect or in case of force majeure with such notice
which is reasonable under the circumstances.

When the Services, hereunder Users, are terminated, all data and copies
of such data will be deleted from SESAMs servers upon the termination
taking effect. The Customer will get access to his data as set out in
section 5.1.

The limitation period for any claims arising in connection with this
Agreement or breach of this Agreement is one year after the termination
of the agreement. Claims forwarded after the limitation period is out of
date and hence have no validity.

12. Confidentiality
===================

Information that comes into the possession of the parties in connection
with implementation of the Agreement shall be kept confidential and
shall not be disclosed to any third party without the consent of the
other party.

If the Customer is a public body, the scope of the confidentiality
obligation under this provision shall not go beyond that laid down by
the Act of 10 February 1967 relating to Procedure in Cases concerning
the Public Administration (Public Administration Act) or corresponding
sector-specific regulations.

The confidentiality obligation pursuant to this provision shall not
prevent the disclosure of information if such disclosure is demanded
pursuant to laws or regulations, including any disclosure or right of
access pursuant to the Act of 19 May 2006 relating to the Right of
Access to Documents in the Public Administration (Freedom of Information
Act). The other party shall, if possible, be notified prior to the
disclosure of such information.

The confidentiality obligation shall not prevent the information from
being used when there is no legitimate interest in keeping it
confidential, for example when it is in the public domain or is
accessible to the public elsewhere.

The parties shall take all necessary precautions to prevent unauthorized
persons from gaining access to, or knowledge of, confidential
information.

The confidentiality obligation shall apply to the parties' employees,
subcontractors and other third parties who act on behalf of the parties
in connection with the implementation of the Agreement. The parties may
only transmit confidential information to such subcontractors and third
parties to the extent necessary for the implementation of the Agreement,
and provided that they are subjected to a confidentiality obligation
corresponding to that stipulated in this clause.

The confidentiality obligation shall not prevent the parties from
utilizing experience and expertise developed in connection with the
implementation of the Agreement.

The confidentiality obligation shall continue to apply after the expiry
of the Agreement. Employees or others who resign from their positions
with one of the parties shall be subjected to a confidentiality
obligation following their resignation as well, as far as factors
mentioned above are concerned. The confidentiality obligation shall
lapse five (5) years after the Agreement comes to an end, unless
otherwise is stipulated by law or regulations.

13. Transfer
============

Without obtaining SESAM's prior written permission, the Customer is not
entitled to transfer all or part of the right to use the Services to
another entity (either through mergers, de-mergers, bankruptcy, change
of ownership or control or to affiliates or otherwise). SESAM may fully
or partially transfer its rights and obligations under the Agreement to
subsidiaries or other companies within the same group, hereunder use
these as sub-contractors, provided that this is done in a manner
assuring compliance with the obligations under the GDPR from the
Customer's perspective.

14. Choice of Law
=================

This Agreement will be construed, regulated and interpreted in
accordance with and governed by Norwegian laws, without giving effect to
its conflicts of law principles. Further, Customer and SESAM agree to
submit to the jurisdiction of Oslo, Norway for any legal disputes
regarding this Agreement or its subject matter herein.

15. Disputes
============

Any dispute or disagreement arising between the parties will be resolved
by negotiations.

If such negotiations fail, either party may request that the case is
brought before a Norwegian court. If the parties so agree, the case
shall be decided by arbitration after Norwegian Act of 14. May 2004 no.
25 on arbitration. If the parties require confidential treatment of the
arbitration proceedings, hereunder the arbitration court's verdict, this
shall be agreed between the parties in writing together with the
arbitration agreement.

The agreed legal venue shall be the location where SESAM has its
registered address when the case is made before the court or arbitration
court.

The following dispute resolution shall apply to the Customers who pay a
Subscription Fee:

The parties will strive to resolve all disputes at the project
management level. If any such dispute cannot be mutually resolved by the
project managers within 7 days, then such dispute will immediately be
referred to the parties' respective division vice presidents (or
equivalents) for discussion and resolution. If such parties fail to
resolve the dispute within 14 days, then such dispute will be referred
to the party's respective Chief Operating Officer (or equivalent) for
discussion and attempted resolution. If such dispute cannot be mutually
resolved by such parties within 14 days, then either party may request
that the case is brought before a Norwegian court. If the parties so
agree, the case shall be decided by arbitration after Norwegian Act of
14. May 2004 no. 25 on arbitration. If the parties require confidential
treatment of the arbitration proceedings, hereunder the arbitration
court's verdict, this shall be agreed between the parties in writing
together with the arbitration agreement.

The agreed legal venue shall be the location SESAM has its registered
address when the case is made before the court or arbitration court.
