============================
Overview of Privacy at SESAM
============================

At SESAM we believe in being transparent. Our Privacy Policies will help
you understand what information we collect and how we use it. The
following Privacy Policies are customized for the different ways
Personal Information is collected, based on legal basis and purposes.

Sesam.io AS (also referred to as “SESAM” or “We”), organization number
922 409 676, is an Integration Platform that uses a unique Datahub
approach for collecting, connecting and sharing data.

To exercise your rights as a Data Subject, please use our `Data Access
Portal <https://me.sesam.io>`_.

Our Privacy Policies were last updated September 2020.

SESAM Privacy Notice
====================

Purpose of the processing and the legal basis for the processing
----------------------------------------------------------------

SESAM will process your Personal Data, in accordance with relevant
statutory regulations and obligations, for the purpose set up in this
Privacy Notice. SESAM will only process your Personal Data necessary for
the performance of a contract to which you are party.

What information we collect
---------------------------

SESAM will collect the “Required Contact Information” you provide
voluntarily when you register with us for the seminar. The information
comprises Personal Data, including name (first and last), email, cell
phone, job title, and company/organization.

How we use the information about you
------------------------------------

All data provided enable us to respond to requests and provide the
services requested, including confirming access and to communicate
details about the event hosted by SESAM.

Marketing
---------

Referring to the questions asked on the website we would like to use
your e-mail address or cell phone number to communicate with you. By
ticking the boxes, you agree to that we will send additional information
about our company and our services, including information about SESAM
and upcoming events, and/or our GDPR product and GDPR compliance.

At any time, you have the right to stop us from contacting you for
marketing purposes by withdrawing your consent in our `Data Access
Portal <https://me.sesam.io>`_.

Sharing and disclosure
----------------------

SESAM will only disclose information with third parties in cases where
consent has been obtained. In case of disclosure, SESAM will ensure that
the parties to whom disclosure is made, grants the users the same rights
as those set forth herein with respect to the processing of Personal
Data. This includes the right to be informed about the disclosure and of
the data maintained about the user and the right to rectify incorrect or
misleading information.

Transfers and Cross-border transfers
------------------------------------

SESAM will not transfer Personal Data which is undergoing processing or
is intended for processing to a third country or to an international
organization, except when Cross-Border Data Transfers are made to
adequate jurisdictions authorized by the Commission or if transfers are
subject to appropriate safeguards. This may include Binding Corporate
Rules, Model Clauses, Standard Data Protection Clauses, Approved Codes
of Conduct, or Certifications.

Retention period
----------------

SESAM will keep Personal Data for as long as necessary to fulfil our
contractual obligations towards you, however no longer than 60 days.
Personal Data will be deleted or anonymized as soon as possible when the
contractual obligation has ended, or by you withdrawing your consent,
unless it must be stored in order to fulfil obligations in statutory
law.

The existence of rights and the control of the information we collect
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Subject to applicable law, you may request access to your Personal Data
or object to the processing. You may also ask us to rectify, update or
to have the information deleted, as appropriate. You also have the right
to receive the Personal Data relating to you in a structured, commonly
used and machine- readable format and have the right to transmit those
data. For your protection, we may require proof of identity including
proper verification and confirmation of your identity.

At any time, you are entitled to have your rights enforced. If you
choose to exercise your rights as a Data Subject, please use our `Data Access
Portal <https://me.sesam.io>`_.

The right to lodge compliant with a supervisory authority
---------------------------------------------------------

You have the right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority if
you consider that the processing of the Personal Data relating to you
infringes your rights.

Change of the Privacy Notice
----------------------------

It may be necessary for us to make changes to this Privacy Notice. We
reserve the right to amend or repeal this notice at any time by posting
a revised Privacy Notice or a new document in its place. If such

revised or new notice includes a significant change to the way that
Personal Data may be treated, SESAM will notify the user of the fact
that its Privacy Notice has changed by sending an email to the address
associated with the user.

We encourage you to periodically review this Privacy Notice to stay
informed about our collection, processing and sharing of your Personal
Data.

SESAM Privacy Policy
====================

In this policy, we aim to demonstrate our commitment to protect our
users ́ and/or visitors ́ privacy. The document comprises the processing
of Personal Data provided to SESAM.

To exercise your rights as a Data Subject, please use our `Data Access
Portal <https://me.sesam.io>`_.

Personal and other data collected
---------------------------------

Through interactions with you as a user and/or a visitor, SESAM collects
Personal Data about you.

This comprises information voluntarily given to us when you contact us,
including first name, last name, your e-mail address and any additional
content submitted while filling out the “Get in touch” form on the Sesam
site or if you contact us by other means.

Legal basis and purpose for processing of Personal Data
-------------------------------------------------------

SESAM will use the data collected for the purpose to perform the
services requested. We will only process the Personal Information to
follow-up, including responding to your requests, and/or managing your
requests, and only to the extent necessary to fulfill such purposes in
accordance with applicable laws and regulations. We have a legitimate
interest in the processing of the Personal Data in order to communicate
and respond to you adequately.

Retention
---------

We may keep your Personal Data for a period of time which is consistent
with the original purpose of collection. After expiry of the retention
period of two years and/or the purpose is fulfilled, your Personal Data
will be anonymized or deleted.

Sharing and disclosure
----------------------

SESAM will only disclose information with third parties in cases where
consent has been obtained. In case of disclosure, SESAM will ensure that
the parties to whom disclosure is made, grants the users the same rights
as those set forth herein with respect to the processing of Personal
Data. This includes

the right to be informed about the disclosure and of the data maintained
about the user and the right to rectify incorrect or misleading
information.

Transfers and Cross-border transfers
------------------------------------

SESAM will not transfer Personal Data which are undergoing processing or
are intended for processing to a third country or to an international
organization except when Cross-Border Data Transfers are made to
adequate jurisdictions authorized by the Commission or if transfers are
subject to appropriate safeguards. This may include Binding Corporate
Rules, Model Clauses, Standard Data Protection Clauses, Approved Codes
of Conduct, or Certifications.

Safeguards
----------

We maintain appropriate organizational, technical and physical
safeguards designed to protect the Personal Data against accidental or
unlawful destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorized disclosure of, as
well as all other forms of unlawful processing.

Your rights relating to your Personal Data
------------------------------------------

SESAM aims to provide transparency for the exercising of your rights.
Based on your request to us, we will provide information on action taken
without undue delay, and in any event within one month of the request.

To exercise your rights as a Data Subject, please use our `Data Access
Portal <https://me.sesam.io>`_.

Right of access
---------------

You will have the right to access the Personal Data held by us and
receive information regarding the processing of this data.

Right to rectification Personal Data
------------------------------------

Upon your request, SESAM will ensure that inaccurate, incomplete or
misleading data are rectified without undue delay.

Right to erasure
----------------

If the data is no longer necessary in relation to the purpose which it
was collected, consent is withdrawn, the data has been unlawfully
processed or have to be erased for compliance with a legal obligation,
or you object and there are no overriding legitimate grounds
for the processing, you have the right to obtain the erasure of the
Personal Data without undue delay.

Right to restrict processing
----------------------------

You can request that the processing is restricted. SESAM must restrict
the processing if the accuracy of the data is contested, the processing
is unlawful, the data is no longer needed for the original purpose or
the verification of overriding grounds is pending.

Right to data portability
-------------------------

You have the right to receive your Personal Data, which you have
provided to SESAM, in a structured, commonly used and machine-readable
format and you have the right to transmit those data to another
controller without hindrance.

Right to object
---------------

You have the right to object to any processing of Personal Data relating
to you carried out on the basis of our legitimate interests.

Right to withdraw your consent
------------------------------

To the extent that the processing of the Personal Data is carried out
based on your consent, you have the right to withdraw this consent at
any time. This will not affect the lawfulness of the processing based on
such consent before it is withdrawn.

Breach
------

In case of a Personal Data breach, which is likely pose a high risk to
your rights and freedoms, SESAM will communicate the breach to you. The
notice will be in clear and plain language. SESAM will notify you
promptly, consistent with the needs of law enforcement and relevant
regulations.

Right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority
-------------------------------------------------------

You have the right to lodge a complaint with supervisory authority if
you consider that the processing of Personal Data relating to you
infringes your rights.

Right to an effective judicial remedy against a supervisory authority
---------------------------------------------------------------------

You also have the right to an effective judicial remedy against a
legally binding decision of a supervisory authority, without prejudice
to any other administrative or non-judicial remedy.

Jurisdiction and Choice of Law
------------------------------

Any dispute that may arise between the user and SESAM in connection with
this Privacy Policy or SESAM ́s data processing activities shall be
subject to, regulated by, and interpreted in accordance with, Norwegian
Law. The user may request that the case is brought before a Norwegian
court.

Change of the Privacy Policy
----------------------------

The Services and our business may change from time to time, hence it may
be necessary for us to make changes to this Privacy Policy. We reserve
the right to amend or repeal this policy at any time by posting a
revised Privacy Policy or a new policy document in its place. If such
revised or new policy includes a significant change to the way that
Personal Data may be treated, SESAM will notify the users of the fact
that its privacy policy has changed by sending an email to the address
associated with the user.

We encourage you to periodically review this Privacy Policy to stay
informed about our collection, processing and sharing of your Personal
Data.

Service Privacy Policy
======================

In this policy, we aim to demonstrate our commitment to protect our
Customers ́ privacy. The document comprises the processing of Personal
Data in relation to the Services provided by the processor SESAM.

The Terms of Service Agreement (also referred to as “The Agreement”)
regulates the activities, responsibilities and risks between SESAM and
the Customers. In the event of inconsistencies between The Service
Privacy Policy and The Terms of Service Agreement, including the Data
Processing Agreement, the relevant privacy provisions of the latter take
precedence.

To exercise your rights as a Data Subject, please use our `Data Access
Portal <https://me.sesam.io>`_.

Legal basis and purpose for processing
--------------------------------------

SESAM only processes Personal Data of the Customer necessary for the
performance of fulfilling SESAM’s contractual obligations to the
Customer according to the Agreement. SESAM will use the data collected
for the purpose to perform the Services requested.

Personal Data and Service Personal Data collected
-------------------------------------------------

By contracting with us, or through your use of Sesam and your
interactions with us, SESAM collect **Personal Data.** This data may
include name, address, billing information and so on. This information
is regulated and processed according to the terms of our general **Sesam
Privacy Policy**.

**Service data** is data that resides on the Sesam systems, to which we
are provided access necessary to perform the Services, including Cloud
environments, as well as test, development, monitoring and support
services. This data may include Personal Information about the company
́s employees, customers, partners and suppliers, and will be referred to
as **Service Personal Data**.

Customers instructions
----------------------

Sesam will process data on behalf of its Customers, in accordance with
the Data Processing Agreement and on the Customers additional documented
instructions in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

If, in our opinion, an instruction infringes applicable Data Protection
law, we will without undue delay inform our Customers.

Rights of the individuals
-------------------------

The Customer is the Controller of the processing of Service Personal
Data, hence any individual the Personal Data is relating to, should
direct any requests, including the right to access, erasure,
restriction, rectification or objection to the processing, directly to
the Customer. We will, insofar it ́s possible, provide reasonable
assistance to the Customer in their obligation to respond to requests
from individuals.

Retention
---------

SESAM will keep Service Personal Data for as long as necessary to fulfil
our contractual obligations towards the Customer, as specified in the
Terms of Service Agreement. Service Personal Data will be deleted or
anonymized as soon as possible, and within 4 weeks, after termination of
the Customer’s account, unless it must be stored in order for SESAM to
fulfil obligations in statutory law.

Subprocessors
-------------

In all cases where SESAM is authorized to engage third party processors,
we will ensure that any arrangement between the subprocessors and SESAM
will be governed by a written contract, including terms which offer at
least the same level of protection for the Service Personal Data as
those set out in the Terms of Services Agreement. SESAM is responsible
for the subprocessor’s performance with regards to the processing of
Service Personal Data in accordance with requirements set out in
applicable Data Protection law.

Security
--------

SESAM has implemented and will maintain all technical and organizational
measures designed to prevent accidental or unlawful destruction, loss,
alteration, unauthorized disclosure of, or access to Service Personal
Data.

The SESAM Services are ISO/IEC 27001:2013 certified. The certification
governs areas of the security applicable to the Services, including
physical access, data access, security oversight, and enforcement. Our
employees are required to maintain the confidentiality of all Service
Personal Data. More specific security measures are set out in the
Agreement.

Breach Notification
-------------------

SESAM will immediately investigate any suspicious incidents that
constitutes or may constitute a Service Personal Data security breach.

When SESAM becomes aware of an incident qualifying as a breach, SESAM
will report such breach to our Customers without undue delay, in
accordance with the Agreement with the Customer. In accordance to the
Agreement and to the extent permitted by law, we will provide our
Customers with all additional, relevant information concerning the
breach reasonably known or available to us. We will facilitate for our
Customers to meet any obligations to report or inform the applicable
Supervisory Authorities and/or the Data Subjects of the Service Personal
Data Breach.

Transfers and Cross-border transfers
------------------------------------

SESAM will not transfer Service Personal Data, which are undergoing
processing or are intended for processing after transfer, to a third
country or to an international organization except when

Cross-border Data Transfers are made to adequate jurisdictions
authorized by the Commission or if transfers are subject to appropriate
safeguards. This may include Binding Corporate Rules, Model Clauses,
Standard Data Protection Clauses, Approved Codes of Conduct, or
Certifications.

Audits
------

Upon request, SESAM shall make available to Customers, all information
necessary to demonstrate compliance with the Data Processing Agreement
and the terms of this Service Privacy Policy, and shall allow for and
contribute to audits by a Customer or a third-party auditor mandated by
the Customer. The Customer shall give reasonable notice of any audit. Any additional audit
terms should be included in the Data Processing Agreement.

Deletion or return
------------------

SESAM will upon your request or within 4 weeks of the date of cessation
of any Services return a complete copy of all the Service Personal Data,
and/or delete and procure deletion of all copies of those Service
Personal Data. We may retain and store the Service Personal Data to the
extent required by applicable laws and only to the extent and for such
period as required by applicable laws.

Jurisdiction and Choice of Law
------------------------------

Any dispute that may arise between the Customer and SESAM in connection
with this Service Privacy Policy or SESAM ́s data processing activities
shall be subject to, regulated by, and interpreted in accordance with,
Norwegian Law. The jurisdiction is Norway, unless otherwise is agreed in
the Terms of Services Agreement.

Change of the Privacy Policy
----------------------------

The Services and our business may change from time to time, hence it may
be necessary for us to make changes to this Service Privacy Policy. We
reserve the right to amend or repeal this Service Privacy Policy at any
time by posting a revised Service Privacy Policy or a new policy
document in its place. If such revised or new policy includes a
significant change to the way that Personal Data may be treated, SESAM
will notify the Customer of the fact that its Service Privacy Policy has
changed by sending the Customer an email to the address associated with
their User Account, and by posting a prominent notice on the Services.

Cookie Policy
=============

Use of cookies by SESAM
-----------------------

A cookie is a small file, typically of letters and numbers, downloaded
on to a device when the user accesses the SESAM website.

We are using Google Analytics to collect information about how our
website performs and how our users, in general, navigate through and use
the site. Google Analytics is a web analytic service delivered by
Google, Inc. The information being generated, including your IP address,
is sent to Google and stored on servers in USA. SESAM do not track
individual users or store Personal Information about individual users.

The main objective with cookies is to understand and optimize the
customer journey. By using it, we aim to give you a better user
experience, hence make the site more responsive and more user friendly.

An overview of our cookies is found below:

.. list-table:: Cookies
   :widths: 20 30 50
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Name
     - Description
     - Storage
   * - _ga
     - Used to separate users
     - Automatically deleted after 2 years
   * - _gid
     - Used to separate users
     - Automatically deleted after 24 hours
   * - _gat
     - Used to distribute traffic
     - Automatically deleted after 10 minutes

Turn cookies off
----------------

By clicking “options” or “preferences” in the menu of your browser, you
will be able to change your cookie settings. SESAM offers you to block
cookies. To block cookies, click “decline” on the cookie consent notice.

Recruiting Privacy Notice
=========================

This Recruitment Notice describes the handling of Personal Data obtained
about job candidates, including information provided by the applicants
as well as information collected from third party sources and
recruiters.

To exercise your rights as a Data Subject, please use our `Data Access
Portal <https://me.sesam.io>`_.

What we collect and why we collect it
-------------------------------------

SESAM will process your Personal Data in our capacity as a recruiter. We
only collect data necessary and relevant for the performance of a
specific job position. The legal basis and the way we collect the
information may differ:

**1. Personal Data collected from you:** When you actively apply for an
advertised position at SESAM, the processing of the Personal Data is
necessary in order to take steps at your request prior to entering into
a potential employment contract. SESAM will collect Personal Data for
the purpose to evaluate the job applicant for an employment position.

We ask for certain data when you apply for a position in our company.
This is Personal Data you provide to SESAM directly, such as contact
information, educational and employment history, achievements and test
results, references, job qualifications, such as CV, resume and/or
transcripts.

**2. Personal Data collected from other sources:** We have a legitimate
interest in collecting Personal Data from third party sources as it
allows us to find and contact potential job candidates and/or to do an
assessment and verification of the candidate for a specific position.

SESAM may collect information from third party sources in the
recruitment process in order to find and contact potential job
candidates. Relevant sources may include, but is not limited to, a
person who is explicitly referring you, publicly available websites used
for recruitment (incl. LinkedIn) and recruitment agencies. The Personal
Data is obtained only to the extent it is permitted by applicable law.

SESAM may also collect information from third party sources allowing the
verification of the Personal Data provided to us and the eligibility of
the applicant. This data may include: employment information from public
sources, information from persons you indicate as a reference,
information from employees with whom you may have interviewed, and
background check providers, only to the extent it is permitted by
applicable law.

How we use the information about you
------------------------------------

The Personal Data enables us to respond to your request and adequately
communicate with you. The information also helps us to complete a
thorough and valid recruitment process, evaluating and verifying
qualifications, hence make a deliberated decision regarding employment.

Special categories of Personal Data
-----------------------------------

We do not request or require, nor do we seek to obtain and process
special categories of Personal Data about a candidate, unless and only
if, we are required to do so by applicable laws and regulations. If such
data is provided from you to us, you explicitly authorize SESAM to
process special categories of personal data and we will only process it
in accordance to applicable laws.

Sharing and disclosure
----------------------

SESAM will only disclose information with third parties in cases where
consent has been obtained. In case of disclosure, SESAM will ensure that
the person to whom disclosure is made grants the candidates the same
rights as those set forth herein with respect to the processing of
Personal Data.

Transfers and Cross-border transfers
------------------------------------

SESAM will not transfer Personal Data which are undergoing processing or
are intended for processing to a third country or to an international
organization. Cross-Border Data Transfers may take place if the
transfers are made to adequate jurisdictions authorized by the
Commission or if transfers are subject to appropriate safeguards. This
may include Binding Corporate Rules, Model Clauses, Standard Data
Protection Clauses, Approved Codes of Conduct, or Certifications.

Retention period
----------------

We will only retain the Personal Data for as long as it is necessary for
the purpose for which it was collected. Personal Data will be deleted or
anonymized as soon as possible when the retention period has ended,
unless it must be stored in order to fulfill obligations in statutory
law.

In cases where the application is declined, SESAM will hold your file
for two years after ended recruitment process. The legal basis for the
processing is our legitimate interest, which exceed the need for
protection of the data subjects interest or fundamental rights and
freedoms. We may ask for your consent to contact you for suitable,
future employment opportunities. You are free to withdraw this consent
at any time.

The existence of rights of the information we collect
-----------------------------------------------------

Subject to applicable law, you may object the processing of the Personal
Data processed or request to access. You may also ask for rectification
or erasure of Personal Data, restriction of the processing, as well as
the right to data portability.

You are entitled to have your rights enforced. At any time, you can
choose to send a request, by following the directions `here <https://me.sesam.io>`_.

The right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority
-----------------------------------------------------------

You have the right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority if
you consider that the processing of the Personal Data collected
infringes your rights.

Safeguards
----------

We maintain appropriate organizational, technical and physical
safeguards designed to protect the Personal Data against accidental or
unlawful destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorized disclosure of, as
well as all other forms of unlawful processing.

Change of the Privacy Policy
----------------------------

It may be necessary for us to make changes to this Recruitment Privacy
Policy. We reserve the right to amend or repeal this policy at any time
by posting a revised Recruitment Privacy Policy or a new policy document
in its place. If such revised or new policy includes a significant
change to the way that Personal Data may be treated, SESAM will notify
the user of the fact that its privacy policy has changed by sending an
email to the address associated with the individual.

Identity and contact details of SESAM
-------------------------------------

SESAM takes your privacy seriously.

For more information about SESAM's privacy practices or if you have any
questions, feel free to contact us at gdpr@sesam.io.